I met John about three years ago, I was trying to figure out what you do with a thorium byproduct, which is a serious problem for the rare earth mining industry. John's going to introduce a resolution to the thorium problem. Essentially an answer to the United States' energy problem.

I'm John Kutch, I started the Thorium Energy Alliance with a few other folks. We want to assist in restarting rare earth production in the United States. Generally, when you're finding things like monazite, you're going to find thorium. You're not going to mine rare earths in this country any time soon, unless we find a solution for what to do with the thorium.

No one's going to build a billion-dollar wind turbine factory in Oklahoma when they can't guarantee they've got a supply of dysprosium and neodymium. They won't do it, because the finance guys won't let them, so that factory ends up in China.

We're bringing a new trade case against China. This case involves something called "rare earth materials" which are used by American manufacturers to make high tech products like advanced batteries, that power anything from hybrid cars to cellphones. We want our companies building those products right here in America, but to do that American manufacturers need to have access to rare earth materials, which China supplies.

I will make this statement, and hopefully nobody throws anything at me, but I would go so far as to say that there is no rare earth shortage. Here is a letter from the University of Southern Florida, reconfirm previous studies. They basically throw away 22,000 tons of rare earths every year due to thorium content.

Assuming you had a 50 percent recovery, that basically covers 100 percent of the U.S.'s current consumption needs. You see where China is, and you see where Mountain Pass is, but what's that purple one down there at the bottom? That purple one is called the "monazite placer era." That was the heavy mineral sands business producing about 15,000 tons a year of rare earth elements as a byproduct of their mining.

As China came into the market and pushed prices lower, and as thorium became more and more of a regulatory obstacle, they basically shut down all that production. Here's another place that there's potentially another 100 percent of U.S. current demand for rare earths sitting right there. Both of these are excellent sources of heavy rare earths.

If China would simply let the market work on its own, we'd have no objections, but their policies currently are preventing that from happening. Being able to manufacture advanced batteries and hybrid cars in America is too important for us to stand by and do nothing. We've got to take control of our energy future, and we can't let that energy industry take root in some other country because they were allowed to break the rules.

We go, "WTO, we're going to come after you with the WTO, and you've got to quit doing that." I told the people in Congress, "You're going to lose that battle." What they did, for the last 18 months, is they shrunk the output of their entire mining sector, so that suddenly, when they go, "You know what, we're going to give you that WTO thing. We disagree on principle, but we're going to agree." Suddenly internal consumption matches production, and the net result is there's even less.

Monazite is a common waste product, and it's also typically associated with xenotime and some other mineralizations. If you look at the people throwing it away, interestingly it's other rare earth mines. One of the rare earth mines, an operating mine in the U.S., actually throws away their monazite.

Iron ore mines, a lot of them produce phosphates, and those phosphates have rare earths. Then the heavy mineral sands business itself, copper, cobalt, uranium, aluminum, there are so many places in the mining value chain, if the thorium problem went away, we could put the United States in a position of challenging China very, very seriously. If you resolve the thorium, problem, you've resolved the rare earth problem.

U.S. policy related to thorium essentially guarantees that China will continue to control the rare earth market, and that's because monazites, which are almost always associated with thorium, are also an excellent source of heavy rare earths. In fact if you look at it on an aggregate basis, that's the number one source for heavies.

If we can't access those sources, we're essentially left with bastasite carbonatites as the primary source, and they are not good sources for heavies, and that essentially leaves China in the driver's seat on heavies.

You can't run a technology-based economy with half the lanthanides, you need them all. The only way we're going to do that is be able to bring the monazites back into the value stream.

I've read every bill that's been out, in fact I wrote parts of the Murkowsky bill, and I wrote parts of the Evan Bayh - Senator Bonn bill from the 111th Congress. The truth of the matter is, none of the bills actually resolve the problems that exist with U.S. rare earth production. Congress basically ignores China's sovereign monopoly.

Congress proposes additional studies, no resolutions. Congress proposes lowering EPA and Bureau of Land Management standards. Congress proposes guaranteed loans to the value-added end of the rare earth business, but provides no money, funding or any real mechanism to help junior mining companies. If you look at a lot of these junior mining companies, they all have a serious thorium problem.

How radioactive is thorium? It's a low-alpha mineral. It takes 12.5 billion years for it to decay one time, which tells you not much is going on with thorium. You could put a chunk of thorium in your pocket, it's not going to hurt you. You could carry it around for a week, a month, a year.

When you're cooking at home and you fire up that gas cook top, that gives off radon. Sunlight, especially at high altitudes. There are so many things in our economy that we deal with every day that are measurably a hundred, a thousand, even a million times more dangerous, and yet we deal with them responsibly because we create industrial guidelines on how to handle this.

Thorium is fertile, and not fissile. No matter how much you get together, it just can't react by itself, it needs a neutron source. You could have millions and millions of pounds of thorium, and the Chinese do in fact have millions and millions of pounds of thorium just sitting in piles, silos, bunkers or just out in the open.

They can do that, that's perfectly legit because thorium is not water-soluble, it won't get into their water supply. It's very heavy, so it's not going to blow away or drift away in the wind.

Your body cannot metabolize it, that is untrue for any of the other actinides.

Mining and refining uranium and highly enriching it is an incredibly dangerous, filthy process, whereas thorium, when it comes out of the rare earth refining process, is usable as is. It's good to go, there's no such thing as "highly enriched thorium." It is what it is, right out of the ground.

Thorium rare earths policy equals energy policy.

Thorium is four times more abundant than uranium, it's hundred of times more energy-dense than uranium in terms of usable energy, six million times more energy-dense than coal in terms of usable energy. You've got some very intense concentration of power there.

What happens when India and China start consuming oil like the industrial economies do? Anybody my age will remember, price shocks. These price shocks happened on very, very minute constraints on supply. Two, three, five percent.

Suddenly what happens is you have a 50 percent increase in the number of people in the world who use oil as part of an industrial economy. What happens when there's a 50 percent increase in consumers in the world? These price shocks will be a normal part of our entire future.

The resources of the world are getting stretched thin. We've got a lots of conflicts over water, food energy. We're losing jobs and we're trying to produce power from diffuse sources. That's what people will tell you is the problem with solar and wind. There's a lot of energy there but it's just too diffuse to try to capture. What is it really? It's a jobs program, and it's not a very effective one.

It all started back when somebody figured out how to yoke an animal to a stick. Then it went to fire, wind, water, coal, oil. Why was there no nuclear age? We fastened on to solid fuels, with a military purpose.

The government wanted reactors that would create both energy and materials for weapons production. The molten salt reactor was invented by Alvin Weinberg, the same inventor as the light water reactor. This is not a paper reactor, this isn't something theoretical, this isn't something that we just thought up. The MSRE and the ARE and a few other liquid-fuel reactors were built and run at Oak Ridge National Labs for over 22,000 hours.

Alvin said you shouldn't use light water reactors for civilian use, you should use thorium reactors because they're safe, they're non-proliferating, they're easier to manage, they don't have any chance of having a runaway aspect to them. The term today would be "walk away safe."

With a light water reactor you're constantly trying to keep it from running out of control, using your control rods, your damping rods.

There's instability by design. The entire time, they're trying to keep this thing as close as they can to something that's catastrophic. Without constant intervention, bad things happen. Because it's a solid fuel reactor, I'm really being generous. Best-case, it'll use five percent of the energy. Then you pull out your fuel rods, now nasty nuclear waste you have to store. It produces large quantities of plutonium, and the whole world's trying to figure out how to get rid of this stuff.

With an MSR you're constantly trying to keep the reaction going. The second you stop trying to keep the reaction going it just solidifies. That's what makes it walk away safe, among other reasons.

If for some reason it got too hot, it will drain itself into a tank, and you can actually reheat it and put it back up into the system. It can't blow up, it's not under pressure, it burns 99 percent of its fuel, it can reduce existing nuclear waste. Normal operational range is seven, 800C. This is where you can create miracles.

It helps transition coal from just being used for heat energy, to now we can take coal and utilize it as a material resource.

Ending the combustion of coal and converting coal into liquid fuels. The normal operating temperature, split your water into hydrogen and oxygen, or you can use natural gas. End the need to sequester CO and CO2. Essentially put us on our own liquid fuel paradigm.

Why can we do it here? Because in the United States we have the largest coal reserves in the world, and these aren't dirty fuels with high sulfur content. These are the cleanest fuels in the world, and these fuels actually have more energy than petroleum-based fuels.

The Department of Energy, 60 percent of their budget is dedicated to creating, maintaining and doing research on nuclear weapons. They're not trying to figure out how to get oil from sands, that's not their primary business.

We're not the only country, as you'll see, working on this technology. As a matter of fact, you could argue that the United States isn't really working on this technology at all, while China and India and a few other countries race ahead.

The other countries out there, countries we'd consider in the West, they are constantly looking to the United States for some direction, and they're saying, "How do we work with this stuff? What are your thoughts on making a homogenous fuel or a liquid fuel reactor?" The response is nothing. The last response the NRC gave was, "Fluid fuel reactors look promising, and we promise to have regulations in place in the next 30 to 50 years."

The CRC for the NRC basically says, "Fluid fuel reactors, all the regulations for that go here." There's a page in the regulations, but there's nothing there other than a little placeholder bookmark. That gives you a sense of our sense of urgency, compared to what the NRC thinks is urgent.

The NRC and the DOE have a hostile position to anything that's not uranium/plutonium-based.

India wants to develop this, but right now the NRC has literally gone to India and Czechoslovakia and said, "How about you stop working on this?"

We're going to just call this a "DOE Kodak moment," because by the same thought process that Kodak found itself out of business, the DOE's going to find itself out of business, because China's developing this stuff right now.

The former premier's son, who's the head of the Chinese Academy of Science, a brilliant guy, educated at Drexel, he said, "Hey, we're going to commercialize a thorium reactor and we're going to control global IP." If they have global IP, when we want to use this system to turn oil into coal, or tar sands into oil, they're going to be making top-line revenue right off us on our own technology. Our energy, no matter what, forever, is going to cost more than their energy.

They just announced that they have run what they call a "salt loop," put in neutronic stand-ins in the salt loop. When you start putting neutronic stand-ins in, that means you're at the doorstep of commercializing this. What are we going to do then, as a country?

They're smart, they've got brains just like anyone, so they're going to have design, engineering, cheap labor, lots of resources. If we add clean, abundant energy to that mix, where's that going to leave the West? We need to have two parties in this. We need to have competition. Monopolies are going to hurt us, we can already see from rare earths what Chinese monopoly of rare earth has been doing to industry. Imagine if they had a monopoly on energy.

The United States really needs to be an exporter again of something. Considering our fiscal, monetary and trade deficit, whatever we're going to start selling, it's got to be big. The biggest market in the world is energy. We're chasing a shrinking pie of oil, trying to convert tar sands. Five years from now, somebody's going to say, "It's like that ethanol deal. We're using two units of energy to get one unit of energy."

In the 50s we believed in crazy things like strategic stockpiles, and stuff like that. Who knew? Weinberg was able to get funding for this thing, this is called the "fireball." Maybe a little bit unfortunate name for a reactor. A six-foot diameter ball, and that's the actual hot cell, the actual reactor chamber, and that thing put out 70 megawatts of heat for about seven hours in its first, initial experiment.

The idea behind it was that you would build a super-bomber that could stay flying for months at a time, just like a submarine would back then. We would put a crew up and they would fly around like a submarine in the sky. Then we invented the ICBM, and so that idea went by the wayside.

The nature of it allowed them to do research. He was also able to access funding to develop the molten salt research reactor. You might be asking yourself, "Gee, John, this thing's proliferation-resistant, it can't blow up because it's not in a pressure vessel, it uses a thing that we commonly think of as a waste product, on and on, it eats other nuclear waste, why didn't we make it?"

We wanted to breed new fuel, especially breed new weapons material. Plutonium, highly-enriched uranium. They were going to do that with a fast breeder reactor so that they could put jobs in California.

Mr. President, since you missed our meeting, the one we had on breeder reactor, I wanted you to know that we sent the message today, Craig. I told Ziegler to tell the press that as a bipartisan effort, that you and Hollyfield and so forth had been bugging me about it. This has got to be something we play very close to the vest. I am being ruthless on one thing. Any activities that we possibly can, should be placed in southern California.

I told Dr. David, and of course [indecipherable 15

58] and the rest, that we do it. On the committee, every time you have a chance, needle them, say, "Where's this going to be?" Let's push the California thing. Can you do that?

I will do. Incidentally, Mr. President. I was so delighted you released that $16 million on the improvement of the enriching complex. That handles a bad political problem for us.

Good, good.

It got killed.

All of this business about breeder reactors and nuclear energy and the stuff, that was one of my poorer subject, science. I got through it, but I had to work too hard. I gave it up when I was about a sophomore.

The unfortunate thing is shortly after that they realized that fast breeders were not a very good reactor design. They were dangerous, could run out of control fairly easily, and so that got killed too, so we've been in a 30-year winter of United States reactor design. The molten salt reactor became this interesting side-note of history until fairly recently.

Our hope is to commercialize a research reactor. One of the things it could do is consume the most dangerous of the actinides and left-over byproducts of our light water reactors. We have all this stuff sitting on parking lots in casks right now, and we're wondering, do we put it in Yucca Mountain? What do we do with it? You could use it as a fuel.

A quick lesson in how our proposed pre-commercialized reactor would run. It would create 14 megawatts of heat energy. There are two safety features that are inherent in it. If it ever gets too hot, the reaction stops. It gets too hot, it cools down, it gets too hot, cools down. For whatever reason that would be making it too hot it would just pulsate.

If it got really too hot, there's a little thing called a "freeze plug" in here. The original molten salt reactor essentially just had a fan blowing on a section of pipe that froze the fluid into a solid. When the electricity to the fan stopped, like might have happened in Fukushima, the fans stop blowing, the salt melted, the whole thing flushes down into these storage tanks which are divided in such a manner that no reaction can take place.

Let's talk about the reaction itself. Here's the pump, here's the loop, goes around in a little circle. That's it. The nature of it is beautiful. You don't have solid fuel, zirconium-coated rods. What you have is a narrow section of pipe. The cross-section just isn't big enough, no reaction can take place. No reaction can take place, comes into the chamber, all of a sudden the cross-section gets really big relative to the small pipe.

Reaction starts taking place, gets hotter, hotter, hotter, goes out here, goes through a heat exchanger, we could have a heat loop or a turbine hall or both, then it goes back around again. You don't have triple and quadruple and quintuple redundant-pumps. You have one circulating pump. It's not a cooling pump, remember this doesn't need to cool.

These things run at 800 degrees Celsius. A light water reactor, or a really good coal-fired furnace can maybe run at about 400 degrees. 400 degrees, the best thing you can do is steam water, but at 800 degrees you can make fertilizer, make liquid fuels from coal, all sorts of things that are processing. We can cut out the whole electrical generation portion and go straight to using this thing just as a heat source for chemical reactions and processing.

Relatively small, to give you a scale that's about six feet in diameter and 18 feet long. It's very compact because it's so energy-intense. A 200-megawatt facility really wouldn't be any bigger than a 12-megawatt facility. Maybe 60 feet, 100 feet, 200 feet. You don't need a containment building because there's no pressure, it's running at atmosphere, or even some people would say below atmosphere. It's almost running in a quasi-vacuum in some parts of it.

You could, if you were not affected by neutrons pounding you, you could lift the lid off one of these things and look down into it, and it'd look like a hot tub. When the salts are molten, a slight blue tint to them. Thin, and as clear as water.

Isotopes, things that we call waste today, are actually commercially valuable things. We could have industrial and medical isotopes, things that you can't do readily today with a solid-fuel reactor, because all those valuable isotopes are locked up in the zirconium and waste fuel of the solid fuel rods.

The fact that it's so hot allows you to use a new generation of turbines. Brayton-cycle turbine, instead of being the size of this hall like a steam turbine, would be about the size of this desk. That's another reason why you can make these things so compact.

An airplane is much more sophisticated than a molten salt reactor. A molten salt reactor is basically like the radiator in your car. Fluid goes through, hits an impeller, goes into the hot engine, comes out, gets radiated out. If your car gets too hot it pushes the radiator fluid into a reservoir. Once it cools down, pulls the fluid back in. That's called "load following."

A molten salt reactor can follow a load, but that's it, that's as complicated as it gets. These flying things are way more complicated, and there's people inside them. You wouldn't have any people near the hot cell of a molten salt reactor.

I sat down with Senator Evan Bayh's staff and the senator, and in the end he basically said, "I don't want to use the word thorium in a piece of legislation because it's going to attract attention." He also agreed with me that if you could create a rare earth co-operative, you could solve the rare earth problem. So what do you do? Move all thorium-bearing rare earth products to a centralized, rare earth refinery.

The refinery would be funded by OEMs who are desperate to get a supply that's not Chinese-based. Hitachi, Mitsubishi, Boeing, anybody who wanted to actually own some of the off-take would invest into the OEM refinery. Now you have your customers as owners of the refinery. Not only have you tied yourself to your end users, but you're saying to them, "Hey, on good years we're going to have a profit because we're a co-op, we have to write you a check back."

Now you're tied very very closely to your suppliers. It enhances access to capital for those junior mining companies because they have a real off-take agreement they can show their bankers. It eliminates the need to lower environmental standards to rush projects, structure that should be impervious to Chinese sovereign monopoly.

That solves the rare earth problem. Bring jobs and direct investment back into the United States. All of the countries in the world who are sick and tired of being forced to move their factories to China.

It's just bad news doing business in China right now. If you don't believe how desperate they are, just look at Malicorp. They can barely offer any usable heavy rare earths, but as soon as China embargoed Japan because of that fishing captain thing, Japan was like, "Here's a half a billion dollars, Malicorp, just on the hopes that you'll be able to provide a second source of rare earth."

I can't tell you how many calls we get, "When are you going to do this? When is this going to happen?"

Of course there are some companies that love that, right? They love the fact that this regulatory issue protects them. We're saying...

They don't have any thorium in their rare earths.

Very, very little, and they dump theirs in a tailing site. We're saying, "Look, it's great that you want a trillion dollars, and that's probably the only thing that's important to you, but I've got two daughters, I live in this country, all of my family is here, and they need a future. They need jobs."

We can all basically stick with the program that's good for you while America is bled white, or we can say, "Hey, let's remove the problem, create this centralized rare earth refinery, and all the countries in the world who are sick and tired of being forced to move their factories to China, they can now come right here."

Suddenly, places that are industrial deserts could suddenly be blooming in technology companies. Where we're going and what I think is much more important, Poe's language creates a regulatory pathway for thorium energy under a federally-chartered corporation. This federally-chartered corporation would be completely financed by private money.

This reactor, it works, it works forever, because the fuel is a by-product from the mining industry. We don't have to necessarily be in a foreign theater fighting for pipeline passageways or somebody else's oil, we can be totally independent. We can still make electricity, and the electricity can go down a power line and plug it into your car.

We want people to know this is real, and that our government has done this. It's not like we think we can, or somebody had a theory or they got it working for five minutes, or it was a cold fusion fake, no. They ran it for 22,000 hours, that's five years.

The research that was true for rare earths is doubly true for the nuclear aspect. What we keep telling Congress is, the day the Chinese start fence-posting patent IP on this technology, no matter what you do, as private sector, as government, as governments, you will never undercut them in the price of this reactor.

The staff are generally fairly good at understanding what the issues are. Republican or Democrat, when you're on the energy committee you generally take it seriously and hire good staff. The staff understand, then they say, "Yep, but it's an election year," or there's some other political reason why we can't do this.

"Thorium's radioactive. Do you want to support anything radioactive?"

Yeah, it'll put the stink on us. These things work. There's no physical reason why they don't work, it's the interference of man's bureaucracy that keeps us from doing this. Republicans and Democrats both agree, it makes perfect sense, and yet we still can't introduce legislation. Thorium isn't dangerous to work with, handle or store. That's what our legislation that we're pushing with says. A tiny pebble that holds back this giant boulder of innovation.

Once we do this, that pebble comes out, we restart rare earth, we open up the possibility for thorium energy, everything starts happening from that point on.

What kind of metallurgy are we looking, to contain the salts in a thorium reactor?

Right now the most likely candidate is something like Hastoy-X, or Hastoy-N, or Incanel-600. Super-high nickel stainless steels. There are some naysayers. "The metal started to corrode from the salts," or, "We started getting fractures." It wasn't true, they absolutely proved it, they proved it back in the 70s. It was more of what people thought.

When people started criticizing it, they would just say, "Jim, can you postulate on what the problems would be?" and they'd be like, "Salt's corrosive! Look at our fenders, it's got to be the salt," and it got transliterated into people saying, "Oh, salts will corrode the reactor." It was never true, the Oak Ridge guys were like, "No no no, it's just not going to happen. It doesn't corrode like that."

There's obviously other engineering issues. Gas removal, byproducts removal, valves that can work at that kind of a temperature. I'm not saying, "Give me $100 million and I'll have a reactor built in a year," but give me $100 million and I guarantee you I'd have a very functional reactor in five years.

I'm John Kutch, executive director of the Thorium Energy Alliance. Thank you for taking the time to learn about thorium and rare earths, reactor designs, legislation, and other areas related to creating a clean, safe, sustainable thorium energy future.

I'd like to invite you to my hometown of Chicago for the 4th annual "Future of Energy" conference, presented by the Thorium Energy Alliance. I think people should be impressed by the breadth and depth of our speakers. From Joe Bonometti...

You've got to be able to take that fluid in and out...

Who has the ability to manage very large projects for the United States military.

All sorts of things that give us the advantage and they're all based on energy.

Colonel Rogie manages energy systems for the United States Army and the military. Canadians such as Dr. David LeBlanc...

We can have 100 percent of the world's electricity, 2500 gigawatts, without increasing the mining we're doing already.

Who have done fantastic work in basic reactor designs...

The ones that are missing were just removed from simple fluorination and sparging.

Kim Lawrence Johnson, who's doing fine works with salt chemistry, and on. The Thorium Energy Alliance is a 501C3 corporation in the United States of America. We're nonprofit, we're tax-deductible, we've been very successful in many ways but we have a lot of work to do. I hope you're inspired to take that step and join us at the conference. There is a real possibility to change how things work here.

We can prevent pollution, we can use a virtuous cycle of byproduct from rare earths to make heat to make the things we need for the society we want to live in. Of course, you can make vast amounts of electricity, that's why it's worth doing. Please contact us at the Thorium Energy Alliance if you have any questions. Hope to see you in May.