This story starts in 1989 after I have given a lecture in Trombay near Bombay the bomb atomic centre in India, now don’t worry that I’m starting in 1989, it doesn’t mean that I will go from now on day by day until today, I will jump over many things.
What I presented there, the company that I ran at that time called fusion and energy corporation had been developing the so called colliding beam fusion, we had taken that time the attitude that control fusion has nothing to do with plasma physics.
It was and still is in our opinion, a matter of accelerator and beam engineering, colliding beams offer immediate high temperature equivalence and the technologies for storing particle beams are much more developed than storing low energy plasmas.
Well after the lecture, I was invited to a director’s office, the physicist they’re telling me ‘you have not invented a new fusion device, what you have invented is a new thorium uranium 233 breeder’.
And I didn’t understand what they meant, of course I started re working on it and as you can see on this slide, just 2 months later we already had a joint paper. These two authors, one is Iyengar, at that time chairman of atomic energy commission of India and Srinivasan director of neutron division.
They essentially adopted my device for the purpose described here ‘feasibility of breeding uranium using DD Exyder’. Have you ever heard about exyder? Of course not, we had coined this word for the device that would be used specifically for this purpose.
Basically, they concluded that the net uranium 233 production using exyder is estimated to be 100g per day or 35kg per year at practically no cost.
Why no cost? Because there will be unparalleled going fusion reactions that will pay for part of the electricity. The device we are talking about is called self-colliding beams, it uses the magnetic field of 6 tesla which even to this date for this volume is the strongest magnetic field.
The device actually, that they proposed to be the breeder, is a disc inserted between two super conducting magnets. The injector is an accelerator as you can see, injecting 1.4MeV D2 ions to be compared with injectors in tokamak, which is 5 to 10 Kilowatts, kilo electron watts this is 1.5 MeV to form colliding beams of MeV against MeV.
A million electron watts corresponds to a temperature of 10 billion grades centigrade if you convert it into kinetic temperature. In the magnetic field one injects the two ions and dissociates them in the middle so for a molecule becomes colliding beams of atomic deuterium.
And as you can follow here you can see that these orbits collide head on in the centre by themselves. This as worked very well, achieved confinement time of 30 seconds as compared to confinement times in plasma fusion devices of typically 30 milliseconds.
This is how self-colliding orbits are formed, it takes about 9 seconds and then restop the injection of the beam to measure a colliding time. 
The fact that we were able to stabilise 1MeV particles colliding with themselves has nothing to do with plasma physics, we have borrowed technologies in accelerator engineering, from accelerator engineering.
In this specific case, we have made the electron oscillate through migma at a certain frequency suddenly it became stable. So in further we should compare our parameters with the thermonuclear this is the temperature tokamaks is on.
We can start immediately with injecting beams so we operate the temperature essentially 10 billion degree equivalent, this is not a real temperature. If you want to achieve the same colliding energy it would have to be heated to 10 billion degrees.
 We achieved this in the 80s, but the density was not good enough and then came a very well known accelerator physicist and engineer John Blewett who proposed a new magnetic confinement called strong focusing which is again strong focusing used in our accelerators while the previous device that we build was so called weak focusing.
Blewet invention of making strong focusing self colliding orbits appeared as a sure shot and Glenn Seaborg immediately decided to support it, we had formed with him as chairman a company called advanced physics corporation in order to obtain funds for the department of energy to build an advanced version of self colliding orbits.
But we were constantly turned down on the policy grounds that all fusion money has to go to tokamak only. Then, Glenn Seaborg deceased and I decided that we are ahead, probably 20 years ahead of the pack so I decided to spend another 10/15 years doing something else.
 And now I’m returning to this problem because I feel that it’s an idea whose time has come. The new design of Exyder, which we call oExyder, is being first time disclosed here.
This is a system that has 6 accelerators injecting the beams, portable particle accelerators they cost 100000 dollars and they can be screwed onto anything you want to inject the beam.
They have been developed for oil prospecting, made round to go deep into the wells. The idea here is now instead of having that large accelerator that we had in the first design to have sufficient high energy here, like 200 kilo watts, injecting the beam, creating a migma but the undissociated one goes back to the accelerator to be reaccelerated back and again and again in this process producing neutrons and the thorium would be placed here.
I will use the same number when we made first presentation Glenn Seaborg and I were making a presentation to a group of investors. The numbers are the ones that may be controversial but I really take from our Indian paper we have our own new numbers and I did them on to present them before they are confirmed.
Exyder means strong focusing self-collider as opposed to weak focusing self collider that so was operational. One unit was a 300 litre unit like you’ve seen in the picture and there would be modular and 30 of these units would be able to produce 100g of uranium 233 because there is also the question 100g of neutrons or 100g of uranium 233.
The energy input now, if we do not have any energy from fusion if fusion is used only to produce neutrons and the whole system is drew on purely from the plug by electricity gross energy cost per gram of neutrons would be 8000 dollars assuming 6cents of industrial scale per kilo watt hours.
In other words to get gross energy cost per neutron using efficiency by 60% but 5 billion electron watts per neutron. It is considered that anything below 200 MeV per neutron is economically feasible.
But now we say we don’t have a fusion reactor but if we just use a little fusion 15% we immediately are reducing the price significantly to 4.5MeV per neutron, in other words, 119 MWh per gram or 7000 hours per gram.
It is not a fusion reactor, it is a fusion device where these producing fusion and producing neutrons but since they inevitably release energy of essentially 4MeV per unit it contributes.
And the argument of our Indian friends was ‘even a small contribution ahs a large effect on the price, even a small extra energy has a large effect on the price’. This still has to be checked, there is a big shot at helium 3 and now the government is selling it for 1000 dollars a litre, the reaction is DD going into neutron plus helium 3 plus 3.2 MeV in parallel DD going into proton plus triton.
So we produce neutrons to go into uranium 233, we produce helium 3 and we produce tritium, which also there is a crisis, our nuclear weapons have to be replenished every 3 years because tritium has a decay and they weaken so there is a shortage of tritium which also becomes helium 3.
Therefore, as an extra bonus this system will be generating 14000 dollar worth per hour uranium 233 and 7000 dollars worth of helium 3, 7000 dollars worth of tritium.
So, actually if you add it all together it will be, if it loses 100g per day it will generate an income of 2 million dollars a day, just one unit. This is the size of the unit and they are packed this way and 30 units will take between the wall and here that’s one unit we’ll produce 100g of uranium 233 and the same amount of tritium and the same amount of helium 3. 
So essentially not that it will not cost anything but that it will so in addition to it generating uranium 233, it will generate money.
