Kim Johnson. My topic is Thorium and Fluorides Energy Chemically Engineered on the Fly. The nuclear differences of Thorium and Uranium are, Thorium which is 100% 232 and Uranium which is 99.3% 238 have different half-lifes, over 14 billion years for the planet, Thorium and 4.5 billion for Uranium.

The abundance of thorium is equal to lead but much better because it’s where you find it is pretty concentrated like in Brazil and India, even Australia and the US too. It’s 4 times as abundant Uranium, it’s easily bred into the fuel that fissions more efficiently and forms far fewer long-lived TrU’s than 238U.  

There’s less than a 1% probability of 233U that comes from Thorium going past Uranium entering Neptune or Pluto. But Uranium via Plutonium 239 is pretty pissed-poor because only less than two-thirds fissions under thermal neutrons which are easy to engineer for. 
 
There’s some chemical differences between Thorium and Uranium also after earths atmosphere had built up in a free auction thanks to wonderful photosynthesis oxygen bearing waters began oxidizing Uranium to its hexavalent state.

Hexavalent Uranium compounds in contrast to pre-module tetrahexavalent Uranium are all quite soluble in water like sulphates leached by water new compounds are widely dispersed and having being scattered far and wide, U compounds today are found as complex generally dilute, deposits containing mixtures of (??) Tetra, Penta and hexavalent Uranium.

Unlike Uranium Tretra- Valent thorium and is constantly Tetra-Valent resists weathering. Its most common forms in natures are Thoria nickname for Thoridioxide, Thoriphosulphate and Throiasilocade and they’re all totally insoluble in water and all natural PHs. 

Thoria containing Solid Fuel is therefore considerably costlier to fabricate and reprocess that UO2 solids solo. Thorium (??) concentrated made of first wind up with an easy reach in earth primordial deposits of rare earth. 

Geo-Chemical Kinship with the Rare Earths: Rare Earth Elements or REEs are a large part of the ash of Ancient Stars, Tri-Valent Metals with practically identical chemistry. Chemical magnets within the earth for Thorium, they form with Thorium a dynamic duo for a living planet and lastly and maybe most importantly for our politicians’ they are reminders that the US must rebuild the industrial and intellectual property, which we once had and develop the best use of Thorium.

Turning back to big stars half of the elements heavier than iron including rare earth form gradually in big stars during the course of their large-stellar lives. However Supernova’s huge neutron bursts synthesise during the first 15 minutes of detonation about half of all elements heavier than iron that exist today. And all elements past Bismuth and most Radioisotopes or R.I.s.

Once the supernova blasts everything deep into space some R.I.s actually experience spontaneous fission particularly all the even number plutonium isotopes, which make even numbered plutonium isotopes hell for bomb makers. This spontaneous fission enriches planet-forming stardust with additional rare earth elements and they comprise about 40% of all Primordial Fission Products.

REEs have practical identical chemistry among themselves and they include Lanthanum through Lutetium you can see the Lanthanide Series in blue, Yttrium right next to  ?? and pretty rare Scandium next to Titanium. 
There exclusively Tri-Valent metals M+3 except for Cerium which is also Tretra-Valent and Thorium which is typically the third most abundant metal after Cerium and ???  in most  re-deposits.
very importantly for our lives, REE’s are chemical magnets for Thorium. The early molten earth crystalised from the base of its primordial mantle upward. REEs weren’t chemically compatible with almost everything in the earths crust and neither was Uranium or Thorium Dioxide.

The rare last freeze layers just under the thin new earth’s crust is largely rare earth gathered radioisotopes and that froze sometime after 50 million years of age that primordial crust cooled, lost buoyancy and began to subduct into the now-solid mantle. 
The subducting Crust dragged the Earth’s REE-Rich Region, now solidified and adhering strongly to early crust, deep into the mantle.

Most likely the location today for the earths early REE-Rich Region is the Core-Mantle Boundary, geologistics call this layer the D” double-prime. The average is 200km in thickness. Each area of D” deforms in response to what the mantle above it is doing.

When you see REE’s subducting plates you get high pressure cell and that makes the region of D” lying below the slabs thinner and less cooler because there’s more pressure going down. However the mantle plumes, you know like a ?? and yellow stone, stretch the height of D” layer beneath.

It makes D” under mantle plumes generate even more heat and sustains our planet’s many hot spots plated colonics and things that are essential to keep our biosphere vital. So REE’s and thorium form a dynamic duo for a living planet. 
Dynamic Core: Molten metal Iron moving in complex convection currents is the mechanism for Geomagnestism. Enabling this strong long-lasting convection are: Thorium, Uranium and Pottsassium-40 in REE-Rich D” resting on the Iron Core.

2-4 billion years ago Uranium and Potassium generated up to 80% of this Decay Heat. However it is long lived Thorium that provides the bulk of R.I Heating that sustains geomagnetism today and this resulting magnetic field sustains life by deflecting the solar wind and keeping it from stripping away our atmosphere and water.

The lack of Thorium was the kiss of death for this lovely planet. It wasn’t endowed with enough Thorium and other RIs to slow its internal cooling enough, so Mars suffered from iron core solidification. This shut down Mars’ Magnetic Field, 99% of its atmosphere and practically all water on the surface of the red planet loss to the solar wind.   

Fortunately we live on a well indwell planet. Thorium plus Fluorides: we can employ this pair to keep earths economy not only alive but healthy much like Thorium maintains a living geology of our planet.  Where Thorium and Fluoride salts come together is LFTR, the Liquid Fluoride Thorium Reactor. 

This alliances the firm one of chemistry and physics and involves the ‘T’ and ‘FI’s short for Thorium and Fissile Isotopes. Who’s mission is to fission from neutron addition. ‘F’ Salts or Flouride Salts and ‘FP’s are nuclear Fissions Products. 
In fact Fluoride Chemistry is the very key to nuclear affordability. Fluoride Chemistry enables LFTR to be efficient it lets it economically and easily refuel “on the fly” and at full power. It removes various volatile fission products Fluorides at full-power operation and it controls fuel-salt build-up of Rare Earths and other in-volatile FPs that would otherwise waste valuable neutrons.
Lets do some refueling on the fly. Fuel Salt that’s running low on nuclear fuel it readily receives more in fluid form. The first case is 20% in which UF6 fresh from ??, although up to 60% of denatured energy come from inbred Thorium. The 40% difference is made up of separable feed of this very fluid and easy to add form of flowing rich Uranium.
You notice on the second case the MFX vapours that dilute and entrain fissile Uranium pentaflar are UF5 from the blanket to the core. They’ll be defined in the next slide.
MFX Multivalent Flourides for Azeotropes and Corrosion control. ‘M’s or metals and/or metalloids chosen from the shaded elements you see here fill the bill either chemically and/or physically.




A typical example of a versatile MFX is Antimony Penflora SbF5 in liquid phase its self ionised forming Tetrafluora Antimonium Hexaphora Antinomies, so it’s easier to say just liquid SbF5. 

In the vapour phase SbF5 like all of these other MFX’s form dimers and trimmers that tend to entrain other higher fluorides. Like vapour phase over you know, hot boiling SbF5 and it’ll stay in the fuel salt to a few percent if you want it to without pressurisation.

You see how the structure is like, you know little kiddy toys where you stick things together, like beads and ?? sandwich between Uranium Pentafloid which is not nearly as evolvant as Hexafloid but it’s a Pentafoid so you know its like a similar twin.   

And here’s an example of a fission product ?? Pentafluoride it gets sandwiched in, it ?? off. When it condenses it comes back out. We can also use MFX to control corrosion in the fuel salt reducing the oxidation state of MFX to MF(X-1) greatly reduces corrosion from fission products in the fuel salt. 

With the fuel salt kept slightly reducing, Hastelloy: another valuable materials construction, is protected from grain-boundary corrosion. Here’s reduce form of MF4

it’s a equilibrium between mental bonds with you know Fluorium on each or it can just proportionate to MF3 and MF5 and MF3 has its own electron pair which is very promiscuous, it kind of looks at MF5 to make the MF5 think its MF6 or something like that, it just sticks on to anything like a naked Fluoride iron.
The slightly-reducing Fuel Salt protects structures by tying up as complex anions elemental fission products that would otherwise compromise structures. Now the nasty fission products you know in the early days of MSR research were not the halogen FPs, you know you’ve heard of halogens you know, Fluorine, Chlorine, Promine, well we do get Bromine and Iodine as major fission products. 

But we also get even more because they’re even numbered elements, even numbered protons. Selenium and Tellurium they’re known as the Chalogens, the Chalogen FPs. 

When reduced MFX seize ?? mess of Tellurium and Selenium because they think they’re siblings, you know they’re long-chain polymers not ?? they plate out onto and attack Nickel grain boundaries cause they’d rather be a Telluride or a Cyanide you know they think they’re bearing, you know making Copper, Selenium and Sulphur compounds.  

It actually makes this insoluble Chalogen chain into something ionic, positive charge on the MF3 and a negative charge on the end of the Tellurium tail. So they’re soluble in salts and they stay away from our valuable Nickel alloys until we can fluorinate them out, we want to hold on to the Tellurium too.

See a lot of guys pay ridiculous amounts for it, for like solar power. Here is the top 10 neutron-absorbing fission products versus all other and this is the solids Zirconium broad case unfortunately, this is actually the data that Jess Gina ?? provided and you can see the big blind starts around 65% and goes down and that’s easing on 135.
and the next worse thing the yellow line is Samarium not a good Samaritan. Here’s something more enlightening from France although there are uprooting in an epithermal spectrum here’s the elemental what we saw reactor inventory elements 34 and 36 Selenium and Krypton are missing.
But not Bromine because Bromine forms in Anions, so its kind of like a weak Fluoride, or Fluoride Anion. You see number 40 the really big peak Zirconium was a one of our major fission products but we can’t really sell that because a lot of its radioactive. 

You know there’s uses for all these things in there and the ones that are missing were just removed from simple fluorination and ?? with whatever inner gas you cared to do or you could use MFX to sparge them and save on helium.
This is from the French research team headed by ?? . This is with noble and fluorinable, referable fission products only periodically removed and the worst thing that remains is this giant Samarium pay new agenium Promethium which is good for batteries and medical stuff and you wont get it from any other reactors except LFTR’s easily. 

And censor fluorides you can use lower melting fluorides salts like seleniual fluorides, you can separate these you know after you get them out of the reactor and sell them to whomever you know if there’s a market. With adequate chemical engineering Thorium and Fluorides make a really good system and you can adjust it on the fly without pushing and pulling mechanical stuff. Are there any questions? 

So like ??? are you gonna plan to offer a lease only, no down payment  LFTR’s?
Well no, I’m not in the business, only in the technical and that’s up to people like Kirk and Jim and other guys. 

